---
title: 6
date: 2000-04-24
layout: post
---

## McAllister Clan Gathering

The magnificent Easter weather provided the perfect setting for the Millenium gathering arranged for all members of the McAllister family of Colonsay. The background preparations have been in train for many months and the operation was master-minded and co-ordinated by Karen Clarke (one of the daughters of Frank Nicholson and the late Susan McAllister), with generous and invaluable assistance from many members of the extended family. The programme began with a private gathering at Colonsay Hotel, to get people into the right spirit (or, of course, vice versa).

Throughout the weekend, a superb exhibition was open to the public within the Old Waiting room, and courtesy of Colonsay and Oronsay Heritage Trust. The exhibition included a brilliant selection of treasured photographs, some of which were very old and all of which were of outstanding interest. The photographic display was enhanced by two detailed Family Trees, presented in a clear and accessible format. It is hoped that duplicate copies will be archived in the island, and that an edited version will be included in the Colonsay website (omitting personal details of living individuals). The Trees traced the descendants of Coll McAllister b. 1790 m. Christian McLugash, also those of Neil McNeill m. Mary Brown through their two children Malcolm McNeill (m. Katrine McEachern) and Murdoch McNeill 1790 - 1884 (m. Margaret Currie).

On Easter Saturday, a grand Ceilidh was held at the new Village Hall, hosted by the McAllister family and from which all proceeds were gifted to the Hall Appeal. The Ceilidh was a huge success and went on well into the "wee sma' hours", and raising some £350 for the Hall Appeal. Duncan "Sandy" McAllister gave a short but comprehensive address of thanks on behalf of all present and his sister Mary presented a token of appreciation to Karen in recognition of her work.


The picture shows Ross Moodie instructing Sophie Byrne, Irene Campbell, Natalie Bailey, Jenny McNeill and Christine Bailey in the finer points of the Palais Glide.

## A New Arrival

Morag and Mike Yellowlees with elder daughter Kate at the baptism of baby Kirsty Sarah by Rev. Freda Marshall on Easter Sunday


## "Flabathon"

Dr John Currie is keen to obtain heart monitoring equipment for the island and the Colonsay Medical Equipment Fund Committee has been formed to assist him. They have announced a "Flabathon" - "for those of us who require to lose some weight and get sponsored for doing it and raise some money at the same time". On 1st May, participants will be weighed in private, at 6pm; their weights will be added together and the total published. On 19th June, the exercise will be repeated "and the total weight loss published".
Sponsorship forms will be available in the Post Office, the Pantry and the Hotel. Other events are being planned including a 70's night, a raffle with some great prizes and a Fun Run around Colonsay (walk, run or cycle). The Committee hopes that they will have widespread support and if anyone wishes to help or has any suggestions for other events they are invited to contact Marion, at Benoran, who is committee secretary.

## Communications

The BT Cellnet service does not exist, and the company is still unable to accept that their engineers have failed to switch it on. People have now lost patience with the situation and have closed their accounts. Anybody visiting the island who needs to remain in touch should consider the purchase of a Vodaphone pay-as-you-go instrument; these can be purchased outright for less than £50.00 and seem to work quite well.

The normal telephone system is still struggling since the electrical storm a month ago. Most subscribers were reconnected very quickly but subsequent faults have been more common than usual. Rumour has it that there are one hundred lines available at each pole, in fifty "pairs", but many of them have been damaged or are out of service. Two or three subscribers will have problems until this underlying difficulty can be addressed.

Industrial difficulties within Calmac have receded somewhat, but there are reports that further negotiations are required. Islanders have been pleased with the quality of service provided in the recent past and are watching the situation with some concern. The IaaO group has indicated that additional links are now required and is requesting an extra service each week.

Further information about the proposed air-service is expected shortly, but expectations are muted.

Caledonian MacBrayne have invited submissions to an independent review of fares. A Community Council meeting to discuss the matter failed to achieve a quorum, but an informal concensus has referred the process to an IaaO meeting on 25 April.

## IaaO Meeting

Here follows the text of the latest IaaO Newsletter, No. 17

### Thursday, 20 April 2000

At the last I.a.a.O. meeting it was decided to frame a report to be sent to Roy Pedersen (consultant dealing with the flight proposal) as it was felt that the survey questionnaire had not been satisfactory. This was done.

Part of this report was to reinforce the point that the islands transport service was insufficient and that the flight proposal can only be contemplated in the light that the island should be being served by 4 and not 3 ferries.

The national steering group has had an initial response from the consultants although not the finished report. The initial response indicates that the reaction to a flight service to the island has been positive both on and off the island (e.g. Health board, education department, local council etc.). However it has been made clear that more work has to be done on the Timetabling and fares for the flight. To this end there is to be a meeting involving all relevant parties in the near future. This meeting will be timed in order that an island representative can attend although it may have to be in Oban in order to ensure that all parties can attend. There will hopefully be a fuller picture by Tuesday nights meeting.

### Fares Review

Cal Mac has issued a consultation paper, via the pier master, which can be filled in either by groups or individuals. The paper is also available on their website for anyone interested to download. Replies need to be submitted by 5th May. Copies can be made for anyone interested. A copy will be left in the shop for people to look at. Contact Lucy or Kevin if you want a copy so you can submit your views on how fares (private and commercial) are structured by Cal Mac.

### Housing

Derek Logies' report is to be put before Argyll and Bute council, Scottish Homes and A.I.E. on the 26th of this month. Andrew Abrahams is attending this meeting to represent the island. After this meeting representatives from all these Agencies are to meet on the island and discuss how to go forward with the plots recently purchased by the land unit for the island. Any other solutions to the housing problem will also come forward at this time.
IaaO Newsletter ends here - Editor

## Electricity

For unknown reasons, the electricity supply has become prone to brief interruptions. Island lore maintains that these cause "surges" and are damaging to equipment, although not to the same extent as the dreaded "brown-out". The HydroBoard has disabused us of these quaint traditions, so we now know that any such problems are coincidental and that our equipment is perfectly safe. Thus it was a coincidence that three power breaks on Good Friday led to the Calmac ticket machine unwinding its entire roll into billowing coils across the office floor.

## Get Well Soon

Angus McFadyen is wearing an eye-patch; seemingly he had a run-in with a cardboard box and happily things are not as bad as they look. The slightly piratical look seems strange amongst the biscuits and will be heightened when (for reasons of equality) Keith's parrot arrives.

## Shooting Match

There was a big turnout in brilliant sunshine for the gun Club Shoot on Easter Saturday (clay pigeons). George Brolly and Duncan "Sandy" McAllister shot well, Don MacLeod won "Best Dressed", John B*****s was voted "Oldest Competitor" and prizes were awarded by Mary MacLeod.

## Summer Visitors

The summer is off to a flying start, with 151 passengers on the Good Friday sailing alone; bookings throughout the season are very encouraging. There was a total of 356 people in Colonsay and Oransay at Easter weekend, slipping to 308 by Easter Monday. The "Hebridean Princess" has been fully booked throughout the early season. Accommodation in Colonsay is still available for most dates, but the high level of interest has encouraged owners to maintain and enhance their upgrading plans; it seems visitors at Easter were very pleased by the many improvements.

## Changes in "The Corncrake"

There are still some changes working through as the format of this newspaper evolves. An enhanced navigational button on the HomePage should make it easier to locate, and the layout has been changed to make it easier to read in hardcopy form. The earlier issues are being archived (including those issues that were not retained and may now have to be recreated). The editor is still keen to hear from readers who wish to make suggestions or to offer contributions.

## What's On in Colonsay

From our last issue: "Blackthorn opposite the quarry: any day now, and for just a few hours, the blackthorn wood will be in perfect bloom. It is an extraordinary sight, well worth noticing."
The moment is almost at hand - on Saturday 21 April it was looking very good, and last year it reached perfection on 27 April.
It was April 27th when your correspondent heard the first cuckoo in 1999, and April 28th when he heard the first corncrake, and first records for 2000 will be welcomed.. STOP PRESS: Corncrake heard at Homefield on 28 April 2000, 17.30hrs
The IaaO meeting on Tuesday 24th April is to be held at 8pm in the Pier Waiting Room, so that any details of ferry fares, freight and comparable services to other islands can be easily confirmed.
MV "Hebridean Princess" will be visiting Colonsay on Saturday 28th April, from 9.00 am until 1pm.
An exhibition of work by Colonsay and Oransay artists is open before the arrival of each ferry, and is mounted in the Pier Waiting Room.
Colonsay House Gardens are open to the public every Wednesday, and the woodland gardens are open every day.
The summer arrangements for pulpit supply are now in place. Services each Sunday are at 11.00 in Church of Scotland and 12.00 in the Baptist Church. All are welcome.
Official Opening of the New Hall is on May 20th
All-island Millenium Picnic and Party is at Seal Cottage on 16 June, following an Ecumenical Service at the Priory

## Snippets

There are two mallard ducklings to be seen, snipe are doing their territorial "thrumming" almost everywhere, chough and falcons are nesting happily; there has been plenty of sunshine and May Blobs (Marsh Marigolds) are rampant; scurvy grass is in flower. Kiloran Farm has a new John Deere tractor with a very sophisticated power/braking system of which Hamish approves mightily; and Archie has a new Zetor. In the absence of an otter this issue, a number of people have commented on a rather fine Chow - "bristly tail and big bushy whiskers, very brown" and "like a shaggy dog that got plugged into the mains." The Great Litter Hunt was well supported and dozens of bags of rubbish were collected, raising some £200 for Hall Funds (PA System).

## The Magazine Section

### John McNeill 1802- 1878

On 4th July 1878, the following notice appeared in the columns of "The Patriot" newspaper, Prince Edward Island:

Fell asleep in Jesus, at his residence New Perth, on Tuesday 25th June, Mr. John McNeill, Teacher, in the 76th year of his age. Deceased emigrated to this Island from Colonsay in 1820. He became a teacher in 1827, since which time he labored successfully for 44 years in imparting instruction to the young. He was also a consistent member and office-bearer in the church of Christ, and both by precept and example, strove to advance the cause of the Master whom he so dearly loved, and whose example he tried to imitate. During his last illness he frequently referred to the hope he entertained of having an abundant entrance administered to him into the rest which is in reserve for the people of God. He leaves a wife and seven sons and a circle of friends and acquaintances to mourn their loss, but they sorrow not as those without hope.

Thou art gone to the grave, but we will not deplore thee,
Since God was thy Ransom, thy Guardian, thyr Guide;
He gave thee, He took thee, and He will restore thee,
And death has no sting since the Saviour has died.

The above obituary was amongst a number which were kindly forwarded to Colonsay researchers in December 1998, by Ms. Joyce Kennedy. In April 2000, further information was supplied by Mr Harvey Schmidt, a direct descendant. It seems that John McNeill married one Barbara MacDonald in 1842 and Mr Schmidt has kindly provided details of the children of their union, with subsequent descent to the present day.


He has also been kind enough to forward a family photograph, reproduced here. John McNeill is seated at left. Next to him is Josiah William MacNeill. His eldest son. Next is Josiah's wife, best known as Sarah (also known as "Angela", although her death certificate reads "Engelia" (Plummer) MacNeill. At the right is Barbara (MacDonald) MacNeill, John's wife, born c. 1817 in P.E.I.


An enlarged portion of the photograph may be of local interest, in case anyone can spot a family resemblance. Mr. Schmidt is of the opinion that John's parents were Rodrick McNeill and Pegy McLean of Colonsay, whose son John was baptised April 26 1802. Since Rodrick and Pegy have a number of living descendants in Colonsay today, it is possible that further information may be available - the children of Rodrick and Pegy McNeill were John, Duncan (m. 1. Peg MacMillan 2. Sarah Calder), Donald, Hugh (m. Flara McNeill, sister to Duncan Ban), Kate, Mary and Hester (who m. John McGilvray, the noted custodian of oral tradition, who d. at Balerominmor). In one traditional genealogy, John McNeill was believed to have m. Mary MacMillan and d. in Colonsay … but there is a possible confusion with his namesake

Due to pressure of work (helping nail plaster board) the editor regrets that the magazine section is a bit short - but takes the chance to repeat an interior picture of the new hall, plus a picture of our oldest inhabitant, Dugie MacGilvary, cutting the ribbon just prior to his 91st birthday. The pictures are by special request - more will follow after May 20th, when an official opening will take place.
